
             Uptane Standard for Design and Implementation
                         uptane-standard-design

Abstract

   This document describes a framework for securing ground vehicle
   software update systems.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Terminology
     2.1.  Conformance terminology
     2.2.  Terminology
     2.3.  Uptane Role terminology
     2.4.  Acronyms and abbreviations
   3.  Rationale for and scope of Uptane Standards
     3.1.  Why Uptane requires a standards document
     3.2.  Scope of Standards coverage
       3.2.1.  Assumptions
       3.2.2.  Use cases
     3.3.  Exceptions
     3.4.  Out of Scope
     3.5.  Design requirements
   4.  Threat model and attack strategies
     4.1.  Attacker goals
     4.2.  Attacker capabilities
     4.3.  Description of threats
       4.3.1.  Read updates
       4.3.2.  Deny installation of updates
       4.3.3.  Interfere with ECU functionality
       4.3.4.  Control an ECU or vehicle
   5.  Detailed design of Uptane
     5.1.  Roles on repositories
       5.1.1.  The Root role
       5.1.2.  The Targets role
       5.1.3.  The Snapshot role
       5.1.4.  The Timestamp role
     5.2.  Metadata structures
       5.2.1.  Common metadata structures
       5.2.2.  Root metadata
       5.2.3.  Targets metadata
       5.2.4.  Snapshot metadata
       5.2.5.  Timestamp metadata
       5.2.6.  Repository mapping metadata
       5.2.7.  Rules for filenames in repositories and metadata
     5.3.  Server / repository implementation requirements
       5.3.1.  Image repository
       5.3.2.  Director repository
     5.4.  In-vehicle implementation requirements
       5.4.1.  Build-time prerequisite requirements for ECUs
       5.4.2.  What the Primary does
       5.4.3.  Installing images on Primary or Secondary ECUs
       5.4.4.  Metadata verification procedures
   6.  References
     6.1.  Normative References
     6.2.  Informative References
   Author's Address

1.  Introduction

   Uptane is a secure software update framework for ground vehicles.
   This document describes procedures to enable programmers for OEMs and
   suppliers to securely design and implement this framework in a manner
   that better protects connected units on ground vehicles.  Integrating
   Uptane as outlined in the sections that follow can reduce the ability
   of attackers to compromise critical systems.  It also assures a
   faster and easier recovery process should a compromise occur.

   These instructions specify the components necessary for a compliant
   implementation.  Individual implementors can make their own
   technological choices within those requirements.  This flexibility
   makes Uptane adaptable to the many customized update solutions used
   by manufacturers.  If implementors wish to have compatible formats,
   they may use POUFs.  POUFs contain a description of implementation
   choices as well as data binding formats.  An implementor who adopts a
   POUF, as well as the Uptane Standard, will be able to interoperate
   with other implementations using that POUF.

2.  Terminology

2.1.  Conformance terminology

   The keywords MUST, MUST NOT, REQUIRED, SHALL, SHALL NOT, SHOULD,
   SHOULD NOT, RECOMMENDED, MAY, and OPTIONAL in this document are to be
   interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   In order to be considered "Uptane-compliant," an implementation MUST
   follow all of these rules as specified in the document.

2.2.  Terminology

   _Bundle_: A set of images released by the repository that is meant to
   be installed by one or more target ECUs on a vehicle during the same
   update cycle.

   _Bus_: An internal communications network that interconnects
   components within a vehicle.  A vehicle can have a number of buses
   that will vary in terms of power, speed and resources.

   _ECU Identifier_: An attribute used to identify a specific ECU (e.g.,
   such as a unique serial number).

   _ECU Version Manifest_: Metadata which details the software version
   currently installed on the ECU.

   _Hardware Identifier_: An attribute used to identify a model of an
   ECU.

   _Image_: File containing software for an ECU to install.  May contain
   a binary image to flash, installation instructions, and other
   necessary information for the ECU to properly apply the update.  Each
   ECU typically holds only one image, although this may vary in some
   cases.

   _Metadata_: Information describing the characteristics of data
   including, for example, structural metadata describing data
   structures (e.g., data format, syntax, and semantics) and descriptive
   metadata describing data contents (e.g., information security
   labels).  As used in Uptane, metadata can be described as information
   associated with a role or an image that contains the characteristics
   or parameters thereof (e.g. cryptographic material parameters, file
   names and versions.)

   _Primary/Secondary ECUs_: Terms used to describe the control units
   within a ground vehicle.  A primary ECU downloads and verifies update
   images and metadata for itself and for secondary ECUs, and
   distributes images and metadata to secondaries.  Thus, it requires
   extra storage space and a means to download images and metadata.
   Secondary ECUs receive their update images and metadata from the
   primary, and only need to verify and install their own metadata and
   images.

   _POUF_: A document that contains the protocol, operations, usage, and
   formats (POUF) of a specific Uptane implementation.  The POUF
   contains decisions about SHOULDs and MAYs in an implementation, as
   well as descriptions of data binding formats.  POUFs MAY be used to
   create compatible Uptane implementations.

   _Repository_: A server containing metadata about images.  May also
   contain the images themselves.  Other data may be stored on the
   repository to be accessed by ECUs during the update process.

   _Suppliers_: Independent companies to which auto manufacturers may
   outsource the production of ECUs.  Tier-1 suppliers directly serve
   the manufacturers.  Tier-2 suppliers are those that perform
   outsourced work for Tier-1 suppliers.

   _Vehicle Version Manifest_: A compilation of all ECU version
   manifests on a vehicle.  It serves as a master list of all images
   currently running on all ECUs in the vehicle.

2.3.  Uptane Role terminology

   These terms are defined in greater detail in Section 5.1.

   _Delegations_: A process by which the responsibility of signing
   metadata about images is assigned to another party.
   _Role_: A party (human or machine) responsible for signing a certain
   type of metadata.  The role controls keys and is responsible for
   signing metadata entrusted to it with these keys.  The roles
   mechanism of Uptane allows the system to distribute signing
   responsibilities so that the compromise of one key does not
   necessarily impact the security of the entire system.

   o  _Root Role_: Signs metadata that distributes and revokes public
      keys used to verify the root, timestamp, snapshot, and targets
      role metadata.

   o  _Snapshot Role_: Signs metadata that indicates which images the
      repository has released at the same time.

   o  _Targets Role_: Signs metadata used to verify the image, such as
      cryptographic hashes and file size.

   o  _Timestamp Role_: Signs metadata that indicates if there are any
      new metadata or images on the repository.

2.4.  Acronyms and abbreviations

   _CAN Bus_: Controller Area Network bus standard

   _CDN_: Content Delivery Network

   _ECUs_: Electronic Control Units, the computing units on a vehicle

   _LIN Bus_: Local Interconnect Bus

   _OBD_: On-board diagnostics

   _SOTA_: Software Updates Over-the-Air

   _UDS_: Unified Diagnostic Services

   _VIN_: Vehicle Identification Number

3.  Rationale for and scope of Uptane Standards

   This Standards document clarifies the essential components and best
   practices for the secure design, implementation and deployment of
   Uptane by OEMs and suppliers.  These practices contribute to
   compromise resilience, or the ability to minimize the extent of the
   threat posed by any given attack.

   However, this specification is intended as an implementation guide,
   and not as a detailed technical argument about the security
   properties that Uptane provides.  Readers interested in such
   documentation should refer to published papers that cover this topic.
   [UPTANEESCAR]

3.1.  Why Uptane requires a standards document

   A standards document that can guide the safe design, integration and
   deployment of Uptane in vehicles is needed at this time because:

   o  The number of connected units on the average vehicle continues to
      grow, with mainstream cars now containing up to 100 million lines
      of code.  [USATODAY]

   o  The expanded use of software over-the-air strategies creates new
      attack surfaces for malicious parties.  [CR-OTA]

   o  Legacy update strategies, such as SSL/TLS or GPG/RSA, are not
      feasible for use on vehicle ECUs because they force manufacturers
      to chose between enhanced security and customizability.

   o  Conventional strategies are also complicated by the differing
      resources of the ECUs, which can vary greatly in memory, storage
      space, and Internet connectivity.

   o  The design of Uptane makes it possible to offer improved design
      flexibility, without sacrificing security.

   o  This added design flexibility, however, could be a liability if
      the framework is implemented incorrectly.

   o  Standardization of crucial steps in the design, implementation and
      use of Uptane can assure that customizability does not impact
      security or functionality.

3.2.  Scope of Standards coverage

   This document sets guidelines for implementing Uptane in most systems
   capable of updating software on connected units in ground vehicles,
   including passenger vehicles, light-duty trucks, heavy-duty trucks,
   and motorcycles.  Uptane could potentially also be applied to other
   ground vehicles, such as automated shuttles, recreational vehicles,
   and military ground vehicles.  Uptane could even be applied to
   domains such as IoT devices, medical devices, and unmanned aerial
   vehicles.  In this section, we define the scope of that applicability
   by providing sample use cases and possible exceptions, aspects of
   software update security that are not applicable to Uptane, and the
   design requirements governing the preparation of these standards.

3.2.1.  Assumptions

   We assume the following system preconditions for Uptane:

   o  Vehicles have the ability to establish connectivity to required
      backend services.  For example, this could be done through
      cellular, Wi-Fi, or hard-wired mechanisms.

   o  ECUs are either directly connected to the communication channel,
      or are indirectly connected via some sort of network gateway.

   o  ECUs are programmable and provide sufficient performance to be
      updated.

   o  ECUs must be able to perform a public key cryptography operation
      as well as some supporting operations.

   o  There are state-of-the-art secure servers in place, such as the
      Director and Image repository servers.

   It is important that any bugs detected in Uptane implementations be
   patched promptly.  Failure to do so could interfere with the
   effectiveness of Uptane's operations.

3.2.2.  Use cases

   The following use cases provide a number of scenarios illustrating
   the manner in which software updates could be accomplished using
   Uptane.

3.2.2.1.  OEMs initializing Uptane at the factory using SOTA

   An OEM plans to install Uptane on new vehicles.  This entails the
   following components: code to perform full and partial verification,
   the latest copy of the relevant metadata, the public keys, and an
   accurate attestation of the latest time.  The OEM then either
   requires its tier-1 suppliers to provide these materials to the
   suppliers' assembly lines or can choose to add the materials later at
   the OEM's assembly lines.  The OEM's implementation is Uptane-
   compliant if:

   1.  all primaries perform full verification;

   2.  all secondaries that are updated via OTA perform full or partial
       verification; and

   3.  all other ECUs that do not perform verification cannot be updated
       via OTA.

3.2.2.2.  Updating one ECU with a complete image

   A tier-1 supplier completes work on a revised image for an electronic
   brake control module.  This module will control the brakes on all
   models of an SUV produced by the OEM mentioned above.  Assuming
   supplier delegation is supported by the OEM for this ECU, each tier-1
   supplier digitally signs the image, then delivers the signature and
   all of its metadata, including delegations, and associated images to
   the OEM.  The OEM adds these metadata and images to its image
   repository, along with information about any dependencies and
   conflicts between this image and those for other ECUs used in the
   OEM's vehicles.  The OEM also updates the inventory database, so that
   the director repository can instruct the ECU on how to install these
   updated images.

3.2.2.3.  Updating individual ECUs on demand

   An OEM has issued a recall to address a problem with a keyless entry
   device that has been locking people out of their cars.  The OEM
   prepares an updated flash image in the manner described above.  The
   OEM then ships USB flash drives to vehicle owners and dealerships
   that allow those parties to update the firmware of their vehicles.

3.2.2.4.  Update one ECU with multiple deltas

   The OEM wants to use delta updates to save over-the-air bytes.  The
   delta images contain only the code and/or data that has changed from
   the previous image version.  To do so, the OEM must first modify the
   Director repository, using the vehicle version manifest and
   dependency resolution to determine the differences between the
   previous and latest images.  The OEM then adds the following to the
   custom Targets metadata used by the Director repository: (1) the
   algorithm used to apply a delta image, and (2) the Targets metadata
   about the delta image.  The OEM will also check whether the delta
   images match the Targets metadata from the Director repository.

3.3.  Exceptions

   There are a number of factors that could impede the completion of the
   above scenarios:

   o  ECUs may be lacking the necessary resources to function as
      designated.  These resources could include weaknesses, in terms of
      CPU or RAM, that render performance of public key cryptography
      infeasible; a lack of sufficient storage to undo installation of
      bad software; or an ECU simply may reside on a low-speed network
      (e.g., LIN).

   o  ECUs may reside on different network segments, and may not be able
      to directly reach each other, requiring a gateway to facilitate
      communication.

   o  A user may replace OEM-installed ECUs with aftermarket ECUs.

   o  A vehicle may be able to download only a limited amount of data
      via a cellular channel, due to limits on a data plan.

   o  A system may lack sufficient power to download or install software
      updates.

   o  Vehicles may be offline for extended periods of time, thus missing
      required updates (e.g., key rotations).

   o  OEMs may be unwilling to implement costly security or hardware
      requirements.

3.4.  Out of Scope

   The following topics will not be addressed in this document, as they
   represent threats outside the scope of Uptane:

   o  Physical attacks, such as manual tampering with ECUs outside the
      vehicle.

   o  Compromise of the supply chain (e.g., build system, version
      control system, packaging process).  A number of strategies (e.g.,
      git signing, TPMs, in-toto [IN-TOTO]) already exist to address
      this problem.  Therefore, there is no need to duplicate those
      techniques here.

   o  Problems associated with OBD or UDS programming of ECUs, such as
      authentication of communications between ECUs.

   o  Malicious mirrors of package repositories, which may substitute
      original packages with malicious packages with matching version
      numbers [MERCURY].

3.5.  Design requirements

   The design requirements for this document are governed by the
   following principal parameters:

   o  to clearly mandate the design and implementation steps that are
      security critical and must be followed as is, while offering
      flexibility in the implementation of non-critical steps.  In this
      manner, users can adapt to support different use models and
      deployment scenarios.

   o  to ensure that, if Uptane is implemented, the security practices
      mandated or suggested in this document do not interfere with the
      functionality of ECUs, vehicles, or the systems that maintain
      them.

   o  to delineate best practices to ensure that, should any part of the
      SOTA mechanism of a vehicle be attacked, an attacker must
      compromise two or more modules to breach the SOTA mechanism.

4.  Threat model and attack strategies

   The overarching goal of Uptane is to provide a system that is
   resilient in the face of various types of compromise.  In this
   section, we describe the goals an attacker may have (Section 4.1) and
   the capabilities they may have or could develop (Section 4.2).  We
   then describe and classify types of attacks on the system according
   to the attacker's goals (Section 4.3).

4.1.  Attacker goals

   We assume that attackers may want to achieve one or more of the
   following goals, in increasing order of severity:

   o  Read the contents of updates to discover confidential information,
      reverse-engineer firmware, or compare two firmware images to
      identify security fixes and hence determine the fixed security
      vulnerability

   o  Deny installation of updates to prevent vehicles from fixing
      software problems

   o  Cause one or more ECUs in the vehicle to fail, denying use of the
      vehicle or of certain functions

   o  Control ECUs within the vehicle, and possibly the vehicle itself

4.2.  Attacker capabilities

   Uptane is designed with resilience to compromise in mind.  We assume
   that attackers may develop one or more of the following capabilities:

   o  Intercept and modify network traffic (i.e., perform man-in-the-
      middle attacks).  This capability may be developed in two domains:

      *  Outside the vehicle, intercepting and modifying traffic between
         the vehicle and software repositories

      *  Inside the vehicle, intercepting and modifying traffic on one
         or more vehicle buses (e.g. via an OBD port or using a
         compromised ECU as a vector)

   o  Compromise and control either a Director repository or Image
      repository server, and any keys stored on that repository, but not
      both the Director and Image repositories.

   o  Compromise either a Primary ECU or a Secondary ECU, but not both
      in the same vehicle

4.3.  Description of threats

   Uptane's threat model includes the following types of attacks,
   organized according to the attacker goals listed in Section 4.1.

4.3.1.  Read updates

   o  _Eavesdrop attack:_ Read sensitive or confidential information
      from an update intended to be encrypted for a specific ECU.
      (Note: Not all implementations will have a need for protecting
      information in this way.)

4.3.2.  Deny installation of updates

   An attacker seeking to deny the installation of updates may attempt
   one or more of the following strategies, among others:

   o  _Drop-request attack:_ Block network traffic outside or inside the
      vehicle.

   o  _Slow retrieval attack:_ Slow down network traffic, in the extreme
      case sending barely enough packets to avoid a timeout.  Similar to
      a drop-request attack, except that both the sender and receiver of
      the traffic still think network traffic is unimpeded.

   o  _Freeze attack:_ Continue to send a properly signed, but old,
      update bundle to the ECUs, even if newer updates exist.

   o  _Partial bundle installation attack:_ Install a valid (signed)
      update bundle, and then block selected updates within the bundle.

   o  Conduct a denial of service attack against the Uptane repositories
      or infrastructure.

4.3.3.  Interfere with ECU functionality

   Attackers seeking to interfere with the functionality of vehicle ECUs
   in order to cause an operational failure or unexpected behavior may
   do so in one of the following ways:

   o  _Rollback attack:_ Cause an ECU to install a previously valid
      software revision that is older than the currently installed
      version.

   o  _Endless data attack:_ Send a large amount of data to an ECU,
      until it runs out of storage, possibly causing the ECU to fail to
      operate.

   o  _Mix-and-match attack:_ Install a malicious software bundle in
      which some of the updates do not interoperate properly.  This may
      be accomplished even if all of the individual images being
      installed are valid, as long as valid versions exist that are
      mutually incompatible.

4.3.4.  Control an ECU or vehicle

   Full control of a vehicle, or one or more ECUs within a vehicle, is
   the most severe threat.

   o  _Arbitrary software attack:_ Cause an ECU to install and run
      arbitrary code of the attacker's choice.

5.  Detailed design of Uptane

   Uptane is a secure software update framework for automobiles.  We do
   not specify implementation details.  Instead, we describe the
   components necessary for a compliant implementation and leave it up
   to individual implementors to make their own technological choices
   within those requirements.

   At a high level, Uptane requires:

   o  Two software repositories:

      *  An Image repository containing binary images to install, and
         signed metadata about those images

      *  A Director repository connected to an inventory database that
         can sign metadata on demand for images in the Image repository

   o  Repository tools for generating Uptane-specific metadata about
      images

   o  A public key infrastructure supporting the required metadata
      production/signing roles on each repository:

      *  Root - Certificate authority for the Uptane ecosystem.
         Distributes public keys for verifying all the other roles'
         metadata

      *  Timestamp - Indicates whether there are new metadata or images

      *  Snapshot - Indicates images released by the repository at a
         point in time, via signing metadata about targets metadata

      *  Targets - Indicates metadata about images, such as hashes and
         file sizes

   o  A secure way for ECUs to know the time.

   o  An ECU capable of downloading images and associated metadata from
      the Uptane servers.

   o  An in-vehicle client on a Primary ECU capable of verifying the
      signatures on all update metadata and downloading updates on
      behalf of its associated Secondary ECUs.  The primary ECU MAY be
      the same ECU that communicates with the server.

   o  A client or library on each Secondary ECU capable of performing
      either full or partial verification of metadata

5.1.  Roles on repositories

   A repository contains images and metadata.  Each role has a
   particular type of metadata associated with it, as described in
   Section 5.2.

5.1.1.  The Root role

   A repository's Root role SHALL be responsible for a Certificate
   Authority as defined in [RFC3647].  A repository's Root role SHALL
   produce and sign Root metadata as described in Section 5.2.2.  A
   repository's Root role SHALL sign the public keys used to verify the
   metadata produced by the Timestamp, Snapshot, and Targets roles.  A
   repository's Root role SHALL revoke keys for the other roles, in case
   of compromise.

5.1.2.  The Targets role

   A repository's Targets role SHALL produce and sign metadata about
   images and delegations as described in Section 5.2.3.

5.1.2.1.  Delegations

   The Targets role on the Image repository MAY delegate the
   responsibility of signing metadata to other, custom-defined roles
   referred to as delegated targets.  If it does, it MUST do so as
   specified in Section 5.2.3.2.

   Responsibility for signing images or a subset of images MAY be
   delegated to more than one role and therefore it is possible for two
   different roles to be trusted for signing a particular image.  For
   this reason, delegations MUST be prioritized.

   A particular delegation for a subset of images MAY be designated as
   *terminating*. For terminating delegations, the client SHALL NOT
   search any further if it does not find validly signed metadata about
   those images.  Delegations SHOULD NOT be terminating by default;
   terminating delegations SHOULD only be used when there is a
   compelling technical reason to do so.

   A delegation for a subset of images MAY be a multi-role delegation
   [TAP-3].  A multi-role delegation indicates that multiple roles are
   needed to sign a particular image and each of the delegatee roles
   MUST sign the same metadata.

   Delegations only apply to the Image repository.  The Targets role on
   the Director repository MUST NOT delegate metadata signing
   responsibility.

5.1.3.  The Snapshot role

   A repository's Snapshot role SHALL produce and sign metadata about
   all Targets metadata the repository releases, including the current
   version number of the top-level Targets metadata, and the version
   numbers of all delegated Targets metadata, as described in
   Section 5.2.4.

5.1.4.  The Timestamp role

   A repository's Timestamp role SHALL produce and sign metadata
   indicating whether there are new metadata or images on the
   repository.  It MUST do so by signing the metadata about the Snapshot
   metadata file.

5.2.  Metadata structures

   Uptane's security guarantees all rely on properly created metadata
   that follows a designated structure.  The Uptane standard *does not*
   mandate any particular format or encoding for the metadata as a
   whole.  ASN.1 (with any encoding scheme like BER, DER, XER, etc.),
   JSON, XML, or any other encoding format that is capable of providing
   the required structure MAY be used.

   However, string comparison is required as part of metadata
   verification.  To ensure an accurate basis for comparing strings, all
   strings MUST be encoded in the Unicode Format for Network Interchange
   as defined in [RFC5198], including normalization into Unicode
   Normalization Form C ([NFC]).

   In the Deployment Considerations document ([DEPLOY]), the Uptane
   Alliance provides some examples of compliant metadata structures in
   ASN.1 and JSON.

5.2.1.  Common metadata structures

   Every public key MUST be represented using a public key identifier.
   A public key identifier is EITHER all of the following:

   o  The value of the public key itself (which MAY be, for example,
      formatted as a PEM string)

   o  The public key cryptographic algorithm used by the key (such as
      RSA or ECDSA)

   o  The particular scheme used to verify the signature (such as
      "rsassa-pss-sha256" or "ecdsa-sha2-nistp256")

   OR a secure hash over at least the above components (such as the
   keyid mechanism in TUF).

   All four Uptane roles (Root, Targets, Snapshot, and Timestamp) share
   a common structure.  They SHALL contain the following two attributes:

   o  A payload of metadata to be signed

   o  An attribute containing the signature(s) of the payload, where
      each entry specifies:

      *  The public key identifier of the key being used to sign the
         payload

      *  A signature with this key over the payload

   The payload differs depending on the role.  However, the payload for
   all roles shares a common structure.  It SHALL contain the following
   four attributes:

   o  An indicator of the type of role (Root, Targets, Snapshot, or
      Timestamp)

   o  An expiration date and time

   o  An integer version number, which SHOULD be incremented each time
      the metadata file is updated

   o  The role-specific metadata for the role indicated

   The following sections describe the role-specific metadata.  All
   roles SHALL follow the common structures described here.

5.2.2.  Root metadata

   A repository's Root metadata distributes the public keys of the top-
   level Root, Targets, Snapshot, and Timestamp roles, as well as
   revocations of those keys.  It SHALL contain two attributes:

   o  A representation of the public keys for all four roles.  Each key
      SHALL have a unique public key identifier.

   o  An attribute mapping each role to (1) its public key(s), and (2)
      the threshold of signatures required for that role

   Additionally, it MAY contain a mapping of roles to a list of valid
   URLs from which the role metadata can be downloaded.  If this mapping
   of URLs is used, the implementer SHOULD implement this functionality
   following [TAP-5] to avoid adding unforeseen security risks.

5.2.3.  Targets metadata

   The Targets metadata on a repository contains all of the information
   about images to be installed on ECUs.  This includes filenames,
   hashes, file sizes, and MAY also include other useful information
   about images, such as what types of hardware are compatible with a
   particular image.

   Targets metadata can also contain metadata about delegations,
   allowing one Targets role to delegate its authority to another.  This
   means that an individual Targets metadata file might contain only
   metadata about delegations, only metadata about images, or some
   combination of the two.  The details of how ECUs traverse the
   delegation tree to find valid metadata about images is specified in
   Section 5.4.4.7.

5.2.3.1.  Metadata about images

   To be available to install on clients, all images on the repository
   MUST have their metadata listed in a Targets role.  Each Targets role
   MAY provide a list of some images on the repository.  This list MUST
   provide, at a minimum, the following information about each image:

   o  The image filename

   o  The size of the image in bytes

   o  One or more hashes of the image file, along with the hashing
      function used

5.2.3.1.1.  Custom metadata about images

   In addition to the required metadata, Targets metadata files MAY
   contain extra metadata for images on the repository.  This metadata
   can be customized for a particular use case.  Examples of use cases
   for different types of custom metadata can be found in the Deployment
   Considerations document ([DEPLOY]).  However, there are a few
   important pieces of custom metadata that SHOULD be present in most
   implementations.  In addition, there is one element in the custom
   metadata that MUST be present in the Targets metadata from the
   Director.

   Custom metadata MAY also contain a demarcated field or section that
   MUST match whenever two pieces of metadata are checked against each
   other, such as when Targets metadata from the Director repository is
   checked against Targets metadata from the Image repository.

   The information listed below SHOULD be provided for each image on
   both the Image repository and the Director repository.  If a "MUST
   match section" is to be implemented, that is where this information
   SHOULD be placed.

   o  A release counter, to be incremented each time a new version of
      the image is released.  This can be used to prevent rollback
      attacks even in cases where the Director repository is
      compromised.

   o  A hardware identifier, or list of hardware identifiers,
      representing models of ECUs with which the image is compatible.
      This can be used to ensure that an ECU cannot be ordered to
      install an incompatible image, even in cases where the Director
      repository is compromised.

   The following information is CONDITIONALLY REQUIRED for each image on
   the Director repository IF that image is encrypted:

   o  Information about filenames, hashes, and file size of the
      encrypted image.

   o  Information about the encryption method, and other relevant
      information-for example, a symmetric encryption key encrypted by
      the ECU's asymmetric key could be included in the Director
      repository metadata.

   The following information MUST be provided for each image in the
   Targets metadata from the Director repository:

   o  An ECU identifier (such as a serial number), specifying the ECU
      that should install the image.

   The Director repository MAY provide a download URL for the image
   file.  This may be useful, for example, when the image is on a public
   CDN and the director wishes to provide a signed URL.

5.2.3.2.  Metadata about delegations

   A Targets metadata file on the Image repository (but not the Director
   repository) MUST be able to delegate signing authority to other
   entities.  For example, it could delegate signing authority for a
   particular ECU's firmware to that ECU's supplier.  A metadata file
   MAY contain any number of delegations and MUST keep the delegations
   in prioritized order.

   A list of delegations MUST provide the following information:

   o  A list of public keys of all delegatees.  Each key should have a
      unique public key identifier and a key type.

   o  A list of delegations, each of which contains:

      *  A list of the filenames to which this role applies.  This MAY
         be expressed using wildcards, or by enumerating a list, or a
         combination of the two.

      *  An optional list of the hardware identifiers to which this role
         applies.  If this is omitted, any hardware identifier will
         match.

      *  An indicator of whether or not this is a terminating
         delegation.  (See Section 5.1.2.1.)

      *  A list of the roles to which this delegation applies.  Each
         role needs to specify:

         +  A name for the role (e.g. "supplier1-qa")

         +  The key identifiers for each key this role uses

         +  A threshold of keys that must sign for this role

   Note that *any* Targets metadata file stored on the Image repository
   may contain delegations, and these delegations can be in chains of
   arbitrary length.

5.2.4.  Snapshot metadata

   The Snapshot metadata lists version numbers and filenames of all
   Targets metadata files.  It protects against mix-and-match attacks if
   a delegated supplier key is compromised.

   For each Targets metadata file on the repository, the Snapshot
   metadata SHALL contain the following information:

   o  The filename and version number of the each Targets metadata file
      on the repository

   The Snapshot metadata MAY also list the Root metadata filename and
   version number.  This is not required, particularly for
   implementations of [TAP-5], but MAY be included in all cases for
   backward compatibility.

5.2.5.  Timestamp metadata

   The Timestamp metadata SHALL contain the following information:

   o  The filename and version number of the latest Snapshot metadata on
      the repository.

   o  One or more hashes of the Snapshot metadata file, along with the
      hashing function used.

5.2.6.  Repository mapping metadata

   As described in the introduction to Section 5, Uptane requires a
   Director repository and an Image repository.  However, it is possible
   to have an Uptane-compliant implementation that has more than two
   repositories.

   Repository mapping metadata informs a Primary ECU about which
   repositories to trust for images or image paths.  [TAP-4] describes
   how to make use of more complex repository mapping metadata in order
   to have more than the two required repositories.

   Repository mapping metadata, or the equivalent informational content,
   MUST be present on all Primary ECUs, and MUST contain the following
   information:

   o  A list of repository names and one or more URLs at which the named
      repository can be accessed.  At a minimum, this MUST include the
      Director and Image repositories.

   o  A list of mappings of image paths to repositories, each of which
      contains:

      *  A list of image paths.  Image paths MAY be expressed using
         wildcards, or by enumerating a list, or a combination of the
         two.

      *  A list of repositories that MUST sign the Targets metadata for
         the image paths.

   For example, in the most basic Uptane case, the repository mapping
   metadata would contain:

   o  The name and URL of the Director repository

   o  The name and URL of the Image repository

   o  A single mapping indicating that all images ("*") MUST be signed
      by both the Director and Image repository

   Note that the metadata need not be in the form of a metadata file.
   For example, in the basic case where there is only one Director and
   one Image repository, and all images need to have signed metadata
   from both repositories, it would be sufficient to have a
   configuration file with URLs for the two repositories, and a client
   that always checks for metadata matches between them.  In this case,
   no explicit mapping would be defined, because the mapping is defined
   as part of the Uptane client implementation.

   The _Uptane Deployment Considerations_ document ([DEPLOY]) gives more
   guidance on how to implement repository mapping metadata for more
   complex use cases.  It also discusses strategies for updating
   repository mapping metadata, if required.

5.2.7.  Rules for filenames in repositories and metadata

   There is a difference between the file name in a metadata file or an
   ECU, and the file name on a repository.  This difference exists in
   order to avoid race conditions, where metadata and images are read
   from, and written to, at the same time.  For more details, the reader
   should read the TUF specification [TUF-spec] and PEP 458 [PEP-458].

   Unless stated otherwise, all files SHALL be written to repositories
   in accordance with the following two rules:

   1.  Metadata filenames SHALL be qualified with version numbers.  If a
       metadata file A is specified as FILENAME.EXT in another metadata
       file B, then it SHALL be written as VERSION.FILENAME.EXT, where
       VERSION is A's version number, as defined in Section 5.2.1, with
       one exception: If the version number of the Timestamp metadata
       file might not be known in advance by a client, it MAY be read
       from, and written to, a repository using a filename without a
       version number qualification, i.e. FILENAME.EXT.

   2.  If an image is specified in a Targets metadata file as
       FILENAME.EXT, it SHALL be written to the repository as
       HASH.FILENAME.EXT, where HASH is one of the hash digests of the
       file, as specified in Section 5.2.3.1.  The file MUST be written
       to the repository using _n_ different filenames, one for each
       hash digest listed in its corresponding Targets metadata.

   For example:

   o  The version number of the Snapshot metadata file is 61, and its
      filename in the Timestamp metadata is "snapshot.json".  The
      filename on the repository will be "61.snapshot.json".

   o  There is an image with the filename "acme_firmware.bin" specified
      in the Targets metadata, with a SHA256 of "aaaa" and a SHA512-256
      of "bbbb".  It will have two filenames on the repository:
      "aaaa.acme_firmware.bin" and "bbbb.acme_firmware.bin".

5.3.  Server / repository implementation requirements

   An Uptane implementation SHALL make the following services available
   to vehicles:

   o  Image repository

   o  Director repository

   Additionally, an Uptane implementation requires ECUs to have a secure
   way to know the current time.

5.3.1.  Image repository

   The Image repository exists to allow an OEM and/or its suppliers to
   upload images and their associated metadata.  It makes these images
   and their metadata available to vehicles.  The Image repository is
   designed to be primarily controlled by human actors, and updated
   relatively infrequently.

   The Image repository SHALL expose an interface permitting the
   download of metadata and images.  This interface SHOULD be public.

   The Image repository SHALL require authorization for writing metadata
   and images.

   The Image repository SHALL provide a method for authorized users to
   upload images and their associated metadata.  It SHALL check that a
   user writing metadata and images is authorized to do so for that
   specific image by checking the chain of delegations as described in
   Section 5.2.3.2.

   The Image repository SHALL implement storage which permits authorized
   users to write an image file using a unique filename, and later read
   the same file using the same name.  It MAY use any filesystem, key-
   value store, or database that fulfills this requirement.

   The Image repository MAY require authentication for read access.

5.3.2.  Director repository

   The Director repository instructs ECUs as to which images should be
   installed by producing signed metadata on demand.  Unlike the Image
   repository, it is mostly controlled by automated, online processes.
   It also consults a private inventory database containing information
   on vehicles, ECUs, and software revisions.

   The Director repository SHALL expose an interface for primaries to
   upload vehicle version manifests (Section 5.4.2.1.1) and download
   metadata.  This interface SHOULD be public.  The Director MAY encrypt
   images for ECUs that require them, either by encrypting on-the-fly or
   by storing encrypted images in the repository.

   The Director repository SHALL implement storage which permits an
   automated service to write generated metadata files.  It MAY use any
   filesystem, key-value store, or database that fulfills this
   requirement.

5.3.2.1.  Directing installation of images on vehicles

   A Director repository MUST conform to the following six-step process
   for directing the installation of software images on a vehicle.

   1.  The Director SHOULD first identify the vehicle.  This MAY be done
       when the Director receives a vehicle version manifest sent by a
       Primary (as described in Section 5.4.2.1), decodes the manifest,
       and determines the unique vehicle identifier.  Additionally, the
       Director MAY utilize other mechanisms to uniquely identify a
       vehicle (e.g., 2-way TLS with unique client certificates).

   2.  Using the vehicle identifier, the Director queries its inventory
       database (as described in Section 5.3.2.2) for relevant
       information about each ECU in the vehicle.

   3.  The Director SHALL check the manifest for accuracy compared to
       the information in the inventory database.  If any of the
       required checks fail, the Director MAY drop the request.  An
       implementer MAY make additional checks if desired.  At a minimum,
       the Director SHALL check the following:

       *  Each ECU recorded in the inventory database is also
          represented in the manifest.

       *  The signature of the manifest matches the ECU key of the
          Primary that sent it.

       *  The signature of each Secondary's contribution to the manifest
          matches the ECU key of that Secondary.

   4.  The Director extracts information about currently installed
       images from the vehicle version manifest.  Using this
       information, it determines if the vehicle is already up-to-date,
       and if not, determines a set of images that should be installed.
       The exact process by which this determination takes place is out
       of scope of this standard.  However, the Director MUST take into
       account _dependencies_ and _conflicts_ between images and SHOULD
       consult well-established techniques for dependency resolution.

   5.  The Director MAY encrypt images for ECUs that require it.

   6.  The Director generates new metadata representing the desired set
       of images to be installed on the vehicle, based on the dependency
       resolution in step 4.  This includes Targets (Section 5.2.3),
       Snapshot (Section 5.2.4), and Timestamp (Section 5.2.5) metadata.
       It then sends this metadata to the Primary as described in
       Section 5.4.2.3.

5.3.2.2.  Inventory Database

   The Director SHALL use a private inventory database to store
   information about ECUs and vehicles.  An implementor MAY use any
   durable database for this purpose.

   The inventory database MUST record the following pieces of
   information:

   o  Per vehicle:

      *  A unique identifier (such as a VIN)

   o  Per ECU:

      *  A unique identifier (such as a serial number)

      *  The vehicle identifier the ECU is associated with

      *  An ECU key (symmetric or asymmetric; for asymmetric keys, only
         the public part SHOULD be stored)

      *  The ECU key identifier (as defined in Section 5.2.1)

      *  Whether the ECU is a Primary or a Secondary

   The inventory database MAY record other information about ECUs and
   vehicles.  It SHOULD record a hardware identifier for each ECU to
   protect against the possibility of directing the ECU to install
   incompatible firmware.

5.4.  In-vehicle implementation requirements

   An Uptane-compliant ECU SHALL be able to download and verify Image
   metadata and image binaries before installing a new image and MUST
   have a secure way of verifying the current time, or a sufficiently
   recent attestation of the time.

   Each ECU in a vehicle receiving over-the-air updates is either a
   Primary or a Secondary ECU.  A Primary ECU collects and delivers
   vehicle manifests to the Director (Section 5.4.2.1.1) that contain
   information about which images have been installed on ECUs in the
   vehicle.  It also verifies the time and downloads and verifies the
   latest metadata and images for itself and for its secondaries.  A
   Secondary ECU verifies the time, and downloads and verifies the
   latest metadata and images for itself from its associated Primary
   ECU.  It also sends signed information about its installed images to
   its associated Primary.

   All ECUs MUST verify image metadata as specified in Section 5.4.4
   before installing an image or making it available to other ECUs.  A
   Primary ECU MUST perform full verification (Section 5.4.4.2).  A
   Secondary ECU SHOULD perform full verification if possible.  If a
   Secondary cannot perform full verification, it SHALL perform partial
   verification.  See the Uptane Deployment Considerations ([DEPLOY])
   for a discussion of how to choose between partial and full
   verification.

   ECUs MUST have a secure source of time.  An OEM/Uptane implementor
   MAY use any external source of time that is demonstrably secure.  The
   Uptane Deployment Considerations ([DEPLOY]) describe one way to
   implement an external time server to cryptographically attest time,
   as well as the security properties required.  When "loading time" is
   referenced in procedures in this standard, it should be understood to
   mean loading into memory the current time (if the ECU has its own
   secure clock), or the most recent attested time.

5.4.1.  Build-time prerequisite requirements for ECUs

   For an ECU to be capable of receiving Uptane-secured updates, it MUST
   have the following data provisioned at the time it is manufactured or
   installed in the vehicle:

   1.  A sufficiently recent copy of required Uptane metadata at the
       time of manufacture or install.  See the Uptane Deployment
       Considerations ([DEPLOY]) for more information.

       *  Partial verification ECUs MUST have the Root and Targets
          metadata from the Director repository.

       *  Full verification ECUs MUST have a complete set of metadata
          (Root, Targets, Snapshot, and Timestamp) from both
          repositories, as well as the repository mapping metadata
          (Section 5.2.6).

   2.  The current time, or a secure attestation of a sufficiently
       recent time.

   3.  An *ECU key*. This is a private key, unique to the ECU, used to
       sign ECU version manifests and decrypt images.  An ECU key MAY be
       either a symmetric key or an asymmetric key.  If it is an
       asymmetric key, there MAY be separate keys for encryption and
       signing.  For the purposes of this standard, the set of private
       keys that an ECU uses is referred to as the ECU key (singular),
       even if it is actually multiple keys used for different purposes.

5.4.2.  What the Primary does

   A Primary downloads, verifies, and distributes the latest time,
   metadata and images.  To do so, it SHALL perform the following seven
   steps:

   1.  Construct and send vehicle version manifest (Section 5.4.2.1)

   2.  Download and check current time (Section 5.4.2.2)

   3.  Download and verify metadata (Section 5.4.2.3)

   4.  Download and verify images (Section 5.4.2.4)

   5.  OPTIONAL: Send latest time to secondaries (Section 5.4.2.5)

   6.  Send metadata to Secondaries (Section 5.4.2.6)

   7.  Send images to Secondaries (Section 5.4.2.7)

   Note that the subsequent sections concerning requirements for a
   Primary do not prohibit implementing Primary capabilities on an ECU
   that does not communicate directly with the Uptane repositories.
   This allows for implementations to have multiple ECUs within the
   vehicle performing functions equivalent to a Primary.  If multiple
   such Primaries are included within a vehicle, each Secondary ECU
   SHALL have a single Primary responsible for providing its updates.

5.4.2.1.  Construct and send vehicle version manifest

   The Primary SHALL build a _vehicle version manifest_ as described in
   Section 5.4.2.1.1.

   Once the complete manifest is built, the Primary MAY send the
   manifest to the Director repository.  However, it is not strictly
   required that the Primary send the manifest until step three.  If
   permitted by the implementation, a Primary MAY send only a diff of
   the manifest to save bandwidth.  If an implementation permits diffs,
   the Director SHOULD have a way to request a full manifest.

   Secondaries MAY send their version report at any time so that it is
   already stored on the Primary when it wishes to check for updates.
   Alternatively, the Primary MAY request a version report from each
   Secondary at the time of the update check.

5.4.2.1.1.  Vehicle version manifest

   The vehicle version manifest is a metadata structure that MUST
   contain the following information:

   o  An attribute containing the signature(s) of the payload, each
      specified by:

      *  The public key identifier of the key being used to sign the
         payload

      *  The signing method (e.g. ed25519, rsassa-pss, etc.)

      *  A hash of the payload to be signed

      *  The hashing function used (e.g. sha256, sha512-224, etc.)

      *  The signature of the hash

   o  A payload representing the installed versions of each software
      image on the vehicle.  This payload SHALL contain:

      *  The vehicle's unique identifier (e.g. the VIN)

      *  The Primary ECU's unique identifier (e.g. the serial number)

      *  A list of ECU version reports as specified in Section 5.4.2.1.2

   Note that one of the ECU version reports should be the version report
   for the Primary itself.

5.4.2.1.2.  ECU version report

   An ECU version report is a metadata structure that MUST contain the
   following information:

   o  An attribute containing the signature(s) of the payload, each
      specified by:

      *  The public key identifier of the key being used to sign the
         payload

      *  The signing method (e.g. ed25519, rsassa-pss, etc.)

      *  A hash of the payload to be signed

      *  The hashing function used (e.g. sha256, sha512-224, etc.)

      *  The signature of the hash

   o  A payload containing:

      *  The ECU's unique identifier (e.g. the serial number)

      *  The filename, length, and hashes of its currently installed
         image (i.e. the non-custom targets metadata for this particular
         image)

      *  An indicator of any detected security attack

      *  The latest time the ECU can verify at the time this version
         report was generated

      *  A cryptographic nonce

5.4.2.2.  Download and check current time

   The Primary SHALL load the current time from a secure source.

5.4.2.3.  Download and verify metadata

   The Primary SHALL download metadata for all targets and perform a
   full verification on it as specified in Section 5.4.4.2.

5.4.2.4.  Download and verify images

   The Primary SHALL download and verify images for itself and for all
   of its associated Secondaries.  Images SHALL be verified by checking
   that the hash of the image file matches the hash specified in the
   Director's Targets metadata for that image.

   There may be several different filenames that all refer to the same
   image binary, as described in Section 5.2.7.  If the primary has
   received multiple hashes for a given image binary via targets role
   (see Section 5.2.3.1) then it SHALL verify every hash for this image
   despite the fact that just one hash is enough to obtain the image
   itself.

5.4.2.5.  Send latest time to Secondaries

   Unless the Secondary ECU has its own way of verifying the time or
   does not have the capacity to verify a time message, the Primary is
   CONDITIONALLY REQUIRED to send the time to each ECU.  The Secondary
   will verify the time message, then overwrite its current time with
   the received time.

5.4.2.6.  Send metadata to Secondaries

   The Primary SHALL send its latest downloaded metadata to all of its
   associated Secondaries.  The metadata it sends to each Secondary MUST
   include all of the metadata required for verification on that
   Secondary.  For full verification Secondaries, this includes the
   metadata for all four roles from both repositories, plus any
   delegated Targets metadata files the Secondary will recurse through
   to find the proper delegation.  For partial verification Secondaries,
   this includes only the Targets metadata file from the Director
   repository.

   The Primary SHOULD determine the minimal set of metadata files to
   send to each Secondary by performing delegation resolution as
   described in Section 5.4.4.2.

   Each Secondary SHALL store the latest copy of all metadata required
   for its own verification.

5.4.2.7.  Send images to Secondaries

   The Primary SHALL send the latest image to each of its associated
   Secondaries that have storage to receive it.

   For Secondaries without storage, the Primary SHOULD wait for a
   request from the Secondary to stream the new image file to it.  The
   Secondary will send the request once it has verified the metadata
   sent in the previous step.

5.4.3.  Installing images on Primary or Secondary ECUs

   An ECU SHALL perform the following steps when attempting to install a
   new image:

   1.  Verify latest attested time (Section 5.4.3.1)

   2.  Verify metadata (Section 5.4.3.2)

   3.  Download latest image (Section 5.4.3.3)

   4.  Verify image (Section 5.4.3.4)

   5.  Install image (Section 5.4.3.5)

   6.  Create and send version report (Section 5.4.3.6)

5.4.3.1.  Load and verify the latest attested time

   The ECU SHALL load and verify the current time, or the most recent
   securely attested time.

5.4.3.2.  Verify metadata

   The ECU SHALL verify the latest downloaded metadata (Section 5.4.4)
   using either full or partial verification.  If the metadata
   verification fails for any reason, the ECU SHALL jump to the fifth
   step (Section 5.4.3.6).

5.4.3.3.  Download latest image

   If the ECU does not have secondary storage, i.e. buffer storage to
   temporarily store the latest image before installing it, it SHALL
   download the latest image from the Primary.  (If the ECU has
   secondary storage, it will already have the latest image in its
   secondary storage as specified in Section 5.4.2.7, and should skip to
   the next step.)  The ECU MAY first create a backup of its previous
   working image and store it elsewhere (e.g., the primary).

   The filename used to identify the latest known image (i.e., the file
   to request from the Primary) SHALL be determined as follows:

   1.  Load the Targets metadata file from the Director repository.

   2.  Find the Targets metadata associated with this ECU identifier.

   3.  Construct the Image filename using the rule in Section 5.2.7, or
       use the download URL specified in the Director metadata.

   4.  If there is no Targets metadata about this image, abort the
       update cycle and report that there is no such image.
       Additionally, in the case of failure, the ECU SHALL retain its
       previous Targets metadata instead of using the new Targets
       metadata.  Otherwise, download the image (up to the number of
       bytes specified in the Targets metadata), and verify that its
       hashes match the Targets metadata.

   When the Primary responds to the download request, the ECU SHALL
   overwrite its current image with the downloaded image from the
   Primary.

   If any part of this step fails, the ECU SHALL jump to the fifth step
   (Section 5.4.3.6).

5.4.3.4.  Verify image

   The ECU SHALL verify that the latest image matches the latest
   metadata as follows:

   1.  Load the latest Targets metadata file from the Director.

   2.  Find the Targets metadata associated with this ECU identifier.

   3.  Check that the hardware identifier in the metadata matches the
       ECUs hardware identifier.

   4.  Check that the image filename is valid for this ECU.  This MAY be
       a comparison against a wildcard path, which restricts the ECUs to
       which a delegation will apply.

   5.  Check that the release counter of the image in the previous
       metadata, if it exists, is less than or equal to the release
       counter in the latest metadata.

   6.  If the image is encrypted, decrypt the image with a decryption
       key to be chosen as follows:

       *  If the ECU key is a symmetric key, the ECU SHALL use the ECU
          key for image decryption.

       *  If the ECU key is asymmetric, the ECU SHALL check the Targets
          metadata for an encrypted symmetric key.  If such a key is
          found, the ECU SHALL decrypt the symmetric key using its ECU
          key, and use the decrypted symmetric key for image decryption.

       *  If the ECU key is asymmetric and there is no symmetric key in
          the target metadata, the ECU SHALL use its ECU key for image
          decryption.

   7.  Check that the hash of the image matches the hash in the
       metadata.

   If the ECU has secondary storage, the checks SHOULD be performed on
   the image in secondary storage before it is installed.

   NOTE: See [DEPLOY] for guidance on how to deal with Secondary ECU
   failures for ECUs that do not have secondary storage.

   If any step fails, the ECU SHALL jump to the (Section 5.4.3.6) step.

5.4.3.5.  Install image

   The ECU SHALL attempt to install the update.  This installation
   SHOULD occur at a time when all pre-conditions are met.  These pre-
   conditions MAY include ensuring the vehicle is in a safe environment
   for install (e.g., the vehicle is parked when updating a specific
   ECU).  Another pre-condition MAY include ensuring the ECU has a
   backup of its current image and metadata in case the current
   installation fails.

5.4.3.6.  Create and send version report

   The ECU SHALL create a version report as described in
   Section 5.4.2.1.2, and send it to the Primary (or simply save it to
   disk, if the ECU is a Primary).  The Primary SHOULD write the version
   reports it receives to disk and associate them with the Secondaries
   that sent them.

5.4.4.  Metadata verification procedures

   A Primary ECU MUST perform full verification of metadata.  A
   Secondary ECU SHOULD perform full verification of metadata.  If a
   Secondary cannot perform full verification, it SHALL perform partial
   verification instead.

   If a step in the following workflows does not succeed (e.g., the
   update is aborted because a new metadata file was not signed), an ECU
   SHOULD still be able to update again in the future.  Errors raised
   during the update process SHOULD NOT leave ECUs in an unrecoverable
   state.

5.4.4.1.  Partial verification

   In order to perform partial verification, an ECU SHALL perform the
   following steps:

   1.  Load and verify the current time or the most recent securely
       attested time.

   2.  Download and check the Targets metadata file from the Director
       repository, following the procedure in Section 5.4.4.6.

5.4.4.2.  Full verification

   Full verification of metadata means that the ECU checks that the
   Targets metadata about images from the Director repository matches
   the Targets metadata about the same images from the Image repository.
   This provides resilience to a key compromise in the system.

   Full verification MAY be performed by either Primary or Secondary
   ECUs.  In the following instructions, whenever an ECU is directed to
   download metadata, it applies only to Primary ECUs.

   If [TAP-5] is supported and a Primary has an external connection to
   the Uptane repositories, a Primary ECU SHALL download metadata and
   images following the rules specified in that TAP.  If [TAP-5] is not
   supported, or if the Primary does not have an external connection to
   the Uptane repositories, the download SHOULD follow the [TUF-spec]
   and the metadata file renaming rules specified in Section 5.2.7.

   Before starting full verification, the repository mapping metadata
   MUST be consulted to determine where to download metadata from.  This
   procedure assumes the basic Uptane case: there are only two
   repositories (Director and Image), and all image paths are required
   to be signed by both repositories.  If a more complex repository
   layout is being used, refer to [DEPLOY] for guidance on how to
   determine where metadata should be downloaded from.

   In order to perform full verification, an ECU SHALL perform the
   following steps:

   1.   Load and verify the current time or the most recent securely
        attested time.

   2.   Download and check the Root metadata file from the Director
        repository, following the procedure in Section 5.4.4.3.

   3.   Download and check the Timestamp metadata file from the Director
        repository, following the procedure in Section 5.4.4.4.

   4.   Download and check the Snapshot metadata file from the Director
        repository, following the procedure in Section 5.4.4.5.

   5.   Download and check the Targets metadata file from the Director
        repository, following the procedure in Section 5.4.4.6.

   6.   Download and check the Root metadata file from the Image
        repository, following the procedure in Section 5.4.4.3.

   7.   Download and check the Timestamp metadata file from the Image
        repository, following the procedure in Section 5.4.4.4.

   8.   Download and check the Snapshot metadata file from the Image
        repository, following the procedure in Section 5.4.4.5.

   9.   Download and check the top-level Targets metadata file from the
        Image repository, following the procedure in Section 5.4.4.6.

   10.  Verify that Targets metadata from the Director and Image
        repositories match.  A Primary ECU MUST perform this check on
        metadata for all images listed in the Targets metadata file from
        the Director repository downloaded in step 6.  A Secondary ECU
        MAY elect to perform this check only on the metadata for the
        image it will install.  (That is, the target metadata from the
        Director that contains the ECU identifier of the current ECU.)
        To check that the metadata for an image matches, complete the
        following procedure:

        1.  Locate and download a Targets metadata file from the Image
            repository that contains an image with exactly the same file
            name listed in the Director metadata, following the
            procedure in Section 5.4.4.7.

        2.  Check that the Targets metadata from the Image repository
            matches the Targets metadata from the Director repository:

            1.  Check that the non-custom metadata (i.e., length and
                hashes) of the unencrypted or encrypted image are the
                same in both sets of metadata.  Note: the Primary is
                responsible for validating encrypted images and
                associated metadata.  The target ECU (Primary or
                Secondary) is responsible for validating the unencrypted
                image and associated metadata.

            2.  Check that all "MUST match" custom metadata (e.g.,
                hardware identifier and release counter) are the same in
                both sets of metadata.

            3.  Check that the release counter in the previous Targets
                metadata file is less than or equal to the release
                counter in this Targets metadata file.

   If any step fails, the ECU MUST return an error code indicating the
   failure.  If a check for a specific type of security attack fails
   (e.g. rollback, freeze, arbitrary software, etc.), the ECU SHOULD
   return an error code that indicates the type of attack.

   If the ECU performing the verification is the Primary ECU, it SHOULD
   also ensure that the Targets metadata from the Director repository
   doesn't contain any ECU identifiers for ECUs not actually present in
   the vehicle.

5.4.4.3.  How to check Root metadata

   To properly check Root metadata, an ECU SHOULD:

   1.  Load the previous Root metadata file.

   2.  Update to the latest Root metadata file.

       1.  Let N denote the version number of the latest Root metadata
           file (which at first could be the same as the previous root
           metadata file).

       2.  Try downloading a new version N+1 of the Root metadata file,
           up to some X number of bytes.  The value for X is set by the
           implementor.  For example, X may be tens of kilobytes.  The
           filename used to download the Root metadata file is of the
           fixed form VERSION_NUMBER.FILENAME.EXT (e.g., 42.root.json).
           If this file is not available, the current Root metadata file
           is the latest; continue with step 3.

       3.  Version N+1 of the Root metadata file MUST have been signed
           by the following: (1) a threshold of keys specified in the
           latest Root metadata file (version N), and (2) a threshold of
           keys specified in the new Root metadata file being validated
           (version N+1).  If version N+1 is not signed as required,
           discard it, abort the update cycle, and report the signature
           failure.  On the next update cycle, begin at version N of the
           Root metadata file.  (Checks for an arbitrary software
           attack.)

       4.  The version number of the latest Root metadata file (version
           N) must be less than or equal to the version number of the
           new Root metadata file (version N+1).  Effectively, this
           means checking that the version number signed in the new Root
           metadata file is indeed N+1.  If the version of the new Root
           metadata file is less than the latest metadata file, discard
           it, abort the update cycle, and report the rollback attack.
           On the next update cycle, begin at step 1 and version N of
           the Root metadata file.  (Checks for a rollback attack.)

       5.  Set the latest Root metadata file to the new Root metadata
           file.

       6.  Repeat steps 2.1 to 2.6.

   3.  Check that the current (or latest securely attested) time is
       lower than the expiration timestamp in the latest Root metadata
       file.  (Checks for a freeze attack.)

   4.  If the Timestamp and/or Snapshot keys have been rotated, delete
       the previous Timestamp and Snapshot metadata files.  (Checks for
       recovery from fast-forward attacks [MERCURY].)

5.4.4.4.  How to check Timestamp metadata

   To properly check Timestamp metadata, an ECU SHOULD:

   1.  Download up to Y number of bytes.  The value for Y is set by the
       implementor.  For example, Y may be tens of kilobytes.  The
       filename used to download the Timestamp metadata file is of the
       fixed form FILENAME.EXT (e.g., timestamp.json).

   2.  Check that it has been signed by the threshold of keys specified
       in the latest Root metadata file.  If the new Timestamp metadata
       file is not properly signed, discard it, abort the update cycle,
       and report the signature failure.  (Checks for an arbitrary
       software attack.)

   3.  Check that the version number of the previous Timestamp metadata
       file, if any, is less than or equal to the version number of this
       Timestamp metadata file.  If the new Timestamp metadata file is
       older than the trusted Timestamp metadata file, discard it, abort
       the update cycle, and report the potential rollback attack.
       (Checks for a rollback attack.)

   4.  Check that the current (or latest securely attested) time is
       lower than the expiration timestamp in this Timestamp metadata
       file.  If the new Timestamp metadata file has expired, discard
       it, abort the update cycle, and report the potential freeze
       attack.  (Checks for a freeze attack.)

5.4.4.5.  How to check Snapshot metadata

   To properly check Snapshot metadata, an ECU SHOULD:

   1.  Download up to the number of bytes specified in the Timestamp
       metadata file, constructing the metadata filename as defined in
       Section 5.2.7.

   2.  The hashes and version number of the new Snapshot metadata file
       MUST match the hashes and version number listed in Timestamp
       metadata.  If the hashes and version number do not match, discard
       the new Snapshot metadata, abort the update cycle, and report the
       failure.  (Checks for a mix-and-match attack.)

   3.  Check that it has been signed by the threshold of keys specified
       in the latest Root metadata file.  If the new Snapshot metadata
       file is not signed as required, discard it, abort the update
       cycle, and report the signature failure.  (Checks for an
       arbitrary software attack.)

   4.  Check that the version number of the previous Snapshot metadata
       file, if any, is less than or equal to the version number of this
       Snapshot metadata file.  If this Snapshot metadata file is older
       than the previous Snapshot metadata file, discard it, abort the
       update cycle, and report the potential rollback attack.  (Checks
       for a rollback attack.)

   5.  Check that the version number listed by the previous Snapshot
       metadata file for each Targets metadata file is less than or
       equal to its version number in this Snapshot metadata file.  If
       this condition is not met, discard the new Snapshot metadata
       file, abort the update cycle, and report the failure.  (Checks
       for a rollback attack.)

   6.  Check that each Targets metadata filename listed in the previous
       Snapshot metadata file is also listed in this Snapshot metadata
       file.  If this condition is not met, discard the new Snapshot
       metadata file, abort the update cycle, and report the failure.
       (Checks for a rollback attack.)

   7.  Check that the current (or latest securely attested) time is
       lower than the expiration timestamp in this Snapshot metadata
       file.  If the new Snapshot metadata file is expired, discard it,
       abort the update cycle, and report the potential freeze attack.
       (Checks for a freeze attack.)

5.4.4.6.  How to check Targets metadata

   To properly check Targets metadata, an ECU SHOULD:

   1.  Download up to Z number of bytes, constructing the metadata
       filename as defined in Section 5.2.7.  The value for Z is set by
       the implementor.  For example, Z may be tens of kilobytes.

   2.  The version number of the new Targets metadata file MUST match
       the version number listed in the latest Snapshot metadata.  If
       the version number does not match, discard it, abort the update
       cycle, and report the failure.  (Checks for a mix-and-match
       attack.)  Skip this step if checking Targets metadata on a
       partial verification ECU; partial verification ECUs will not have
       Snapshot metadata.

   3.  Check that the Targets metadata has been signed by the threshold
       of keys specified in the relevant metadata file (Checks for an
       arbitrary software attack):

       1.  If checking top-level Targets metadata, the threshold of keys
           is specified in the Root metadata.

       2.  If checking delegated Targets metadata, the threshold of keys
           is specified in the Targets metadata file that delegated
           authority to this role.

   4.  Check that the version number of the previous Targets metadata
       file, if any, is less than or equal to the version number of this
       Targets metadata file.  (Checks for a rollback attack.)

   5.  Check that the current (or latest securely attested) time is
       lower than the expiration timestamp in this Targets metadata
       file.  (Checks for a freeze attack.)

   6.  If checking Targets metadata from the Director repository, verify
       that there are no delegations.

   7.  If checking Targets metadata from the Director repository, check
       that no ECU identifier is represented more than once.

5.4.4.7.  How to resolve delegations

   To properly check Targets metadata for an image, an ECU MUST locate
   the metadata file(s) for the role (or roles) that have the authority
   to sign the image.  This metadata might be located in the top-level
   Targets metadata, but it also may be delegated to another role or to
   multiple roles.  Therefore, all delegations MUST be resolved using
   the following recursive procedure, beginning with the top-level
   Targets metadata file.

   1.  Download the current metadata file, and check it following the
       procedure in Section 5.4.4.6.  If the file cannot be loaded, or
       if any verification step fails, abort the delegation resolution,
       and indicate that Image metadata cannot be found because of a
       missing or invalid role.

   2.  If the current metadata file contains signed metadata about the
       image, end the delegation resolution and return the metadata to
       be checked.

   3.  If the current metadata file was reached via a terminating
       delegation and does not contain signed metadata about the image,
       abort the delegation resolution for this image and return an
       error indicating that image metadata could not be found.

   4.  Search the list of delegations, in listed order.  For each
       delegation:

       1.  Check if the delegation applies to the image being processed.
           For the delegation to apply, it MUST include the hardware
           identifier of the target, and the target name must match one
           of the delegation's image paths.  If either of these tests
           fail, move on to the next delegation in the list.

       2.  If the delegation is a multi-role delegation, follow the
           procedure described in Section 5.4.4.8.  If the multi-role
           delegation is terminating and no valid Image metadata is
           found, abort the delegation resolution and return an error
           indicating that image metadata could not be found.

       3.  If the delegation is a normal delegation, perform delegation
           resolution, starting at step 1.  Note that this may recurse
           an arbitrary number of levels deep.  If a delegation that
           applies to the image is found but no image metadata is found
           in the delegated roles or any of its sub-delegations, simply
           continue on with the next delegation in the list.  The search
           is only completed/aborted if image metadata or a terminating
           delegation that applies to the image is found.

   5.  If the end of the list of delegations in the top-level metadata
       is reached without finding valid image metadata, return an error
       indicating that image metadata could not be found.

5.4.4.8.  Multi-role delegations

   It is possible to delegate signing authority to multiple delegated
   roles as described in [TAP-3].  Each multi-role delegation
   effectively contains a list of ordinary delegations, plus a threshold
   of those roles that must be in agreement about the non-custom
   metadata for the image.  All multi-role delegations MUST be resolved
   using the following procedure.  Note that there may be sub-
   delegations inside multi-role delegations.

   1.  For each of the roles in the delegation, find and load the image
       metadata (or error) following the procedure in Section 5.4.4.7.

   2.  Inspect the non-custom part of the metadata loaded in step 1:

       1.  Locate all sets of roles which have agreeing (i.e. identical)
           non-custom metadata and "MUST match" custom metadata.
           Discard any set of roles with a size smaller than the
           threshold of roles that must be in agreement for this
           delegation.

       2.  Check for a conflict.  A conflict exists if there remains
           more than one agreeing set of roles, each set having
           different metadata.  If a conflict is found, choose and
           return the metadata from the set of roles which includes the
           earliest role in the multi-delegation list.

       3.  If there is no conflict, check if there is any single set of
           roles with matching non-custom metadata.  If there is, choose
           and return the metadata from this set.

       4.  If no agreeing set can be found that meets the agreement
           threshold, return an error indicating that image metadata
           could not be found.

6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [NFC]      Davis, M. and M. Duerst, "Unicode Standard Annex #15:
              Unicode Normalization Forms", October 2018,
              <http://www.unicode.org/reports/tr15/>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC3647]  Chokhani, S., Ford, W., Sabett, R., Merrill, C., and S.
              Wu, "Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certificate
              Policy and Certification Practices Framework", RFC 3647,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC3647, November 2003,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3647>.

   [RFC5198]  Klensin, J. and M. Padlipsky, "Unicode Format for Network
              Interchange", RFC 5198, DOI 10.17487/RFC5198, March 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5198>.

   [TAP-3]    Kuppusamy, T., Awwad, S., Cordell, E., Diaz, V., Moshenko,
              J., and J. Cappos, "The Update Framework TAP 3 - Multi-
              role delegations", January 2018,
              <https://github.com/theupdateframework/taps/blob/
              d0818e580c322815a473520f2e8cc5f5eb8df499/tap3.md>.

   [TAP-4]    Kuppusamy, T., Awwad, S., Cordell, E., Diaz, V., Moshenko,
              J., and J. Cappos, "The Update Framework TAP 4 - Multiple
              repository consensus on entrusted targets", December 2017,
              <https://github.com/theupdateframework/taps/
              blob/2cb67d913ec19424d1e354b38f862886fbfd4105/tap4.md>.

   [TAP-5]    Kuppusamy, T., Awwad, S., Cordell, E., Diaz, V., Moshenko,
              J., and J. Cappos, "The Update Framework TAP 5 - Setting
              URLs for roles in the root metadata file", January 2018,
              <https://github.com/theupdateframework/taps/
              blob/01726d203c9b9c029d26f6612069ce3180500d9a/
              tap5.md#downloading-metadata-and-target-files>.

   [TUF-spec]
              Samuel, J., Mathewson, N., Condra, G., Diaz, V.,
              Kuppusamy, T., Awwad, S., Tobias, S., Wright, J., Mehnert,
              H., Tryzelaar, E., Cappos, J., and R. Dingledine, "The
              Update Framework Specification", September 2018,
              <https://github.com/theupdateframework/specification/
              blob/2b4e18472fe25d5b57f36f6fa50104967c8faeaa/
              tuf-spec.md>.

6.2.  Informative References

   [CR-OTA]   Barry, K., "Automakers Embrace Over-the-Air Updates, but
              Can We Trust Digital Car Repair?", April 2018,
              <https://www.consumerreports.org/automotive-technology/
              automakers-embrace-over-the-air-updates-can-we-trust-
              digital-car-repair/>.

   [DEPLOY]   Members of the Uptane Alliance Community, ., "Uptane
              Deployment Considerations", n.d.,
              <https://docs.google.com/document/
              d/17wOs-T7mugwte5_Dt-KLGMsp-3_yAARejpFmrAMefSE/>.

   [IN-TOTO]  "in-toto: A framework to secure the integrity of software
              supply chains", October 2018,
              <https://in-toto.github.io/>.

   [MERCURY]  Kuppusamy, T., Diaz, V., and J. Cappos, "Mercury:
              Bandwidth-Effective Prevention of Rollback Attacks Against
              Community Repositories", ISBN 978-1-931971-38-6, July
              2017,
              <https://www.usenix.org/system/files/conference/atc17/
              atc17-kuppusamy.pdf>.

   [PEP-458]  Kuppusamy, T., Diaz, V., Stufft, D., and J. Cappos, "PEP
              458 -- Surviving a Compromise of PyPI", September 2013,
              <https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0458/>.

   [UPTANEESCAR]
              Kuppusamy, T., Brown, A., Awwad, S., McCoy, D., Bielawski,
              R., Mott, C., Lauzon, S., Weimerskirch, A., and J. Cappos,
              "Securing Software Updates for Automobiles", October 2016,
              <https://ssl.engineering.nyu.edu/papers/
              kuppusamy_escar_16.pdf>.

   [USATODAY]
              O'Donnell, B., "Your average car is a lot more code-driven
              than you think", June 2016,
              <https://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/columnist/2016/06/28/
              your-average-car-lot-more-code-driven-than-you-
              think/86437052/>.

Author's Address

   Uptane Alliance Community
   Uptane Alliance (c/o Prof. Justin Cappos)
   6 MetroTech
   Brooklyn, NY  11201
   USA

   Email: uptane-standards@googlegroups.com

